# Long Integer Project
- **Programmer**: Mike Boyle
- **Date**: 2022-04-18
- **Section**: CSC-331H

This project implements a `LongInt` class to represent arbitraily large positive and negative integers. Typical `int` classes use bits to represent an integer and are thus an integer class of `n` bits is limited to integers within +/- `2^n` (e.g., `2^32` in the case of a 32 bit integer). `LongInt` gets around this by representing each digit of the number as a node in a doubly linked list.


## Contents
The following files should be present in the same folder:

- `main.cpp` (tester and driver)
- `.replit` (if running in replit.com)
- `README.md` (which you are reading right now)
- `LongInt.cpp`
- `LongInt.h`

Because `LongInt` is implemented with a doubly linked list, the following files must also be present in the same folder:

- `DoublyLinkedList.cpp`
- `DoublyLinkedList.h`
- `ListIterator.cpp`
- `ListIterator.h`
- `Node.h`

In addition, `LongInt` requires the following files for its multiplication function:

- `Matrix.cpp`
- `Matrix.h`
- `Row.cpp`
- `Row.h`

## Usage
To use the `LongInt` class in your program, you'll need to `#include "LongInt.h"`.

You can then construct and use instances of the class. For example:
```
// construct from a string
LongInt L1("1234567890");

// construct from an int
LongInt L2(88888);

// construct from user input
LongInt L3;
cout << "Enter a long int: ";
cin >> L3;
cout << L3;

// Comparisions
cout << L1 == L2 << endl;
cout << L1 <= L2 << endl;
// etc.

// Arithmetic
cout << L1 + L2 << endl;
cout << L1 - L2 << endl;
cout << L1 * L2 << endl;
cout << L1 / L2 << endl;
cout << L1 % L2 << endl;
```

## Automated testing
The driver program (`main.cpp`) runs automated tests on the comparison and arithmetic functions of `LongInt`. These cases are generated by looping through two sequences of numbers and checking the addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and modulo operators for all valid combinations of the two numbers. In total there are more than 300,000 test cases, and the program will display the ongoing progress of each test.

## Manual testing
When the automated tests are completed, `main.cpp` will allow users to manually create long ints and test their addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and modulo operations.

## Compiling and running the driver
To run the tester on the replit.com repo, simply press the Run button.

To compile and run locally:

1. Ensure all project files are in the same folder.
1. Compile `main.cpp`: `g++ main.cpp Matrix.cpp Row.cpp LongInt.cpp -o main`.
1. Run the compiled executable: `./main`

## Implementation notes

### Basic operations
- Addition and subtraction are handled in a way very similar to how a human would manually add up long integer sums, with carrying and borrowing.
- Division is handled in a way very similar to manual long division, one digit at a time. To determine the correct digit in the answer, repeated subtraction is used. However because this mirrors long division, the maximum number of repeated subtractions is `9 * <number of digits in dividend>`.
- Modulo uses the same procedures as division, except we return the final remainder instead of the quotient. Modulo also has many more cases where we can get an answer without doing any division at all (for example, a smaller number modulo a larger number), so it is noticeably faster.
- Multiplication is handled in a very different way, using matrix multiplication. [Please see my github gist](https://github.com/mikeboyle/long-int-multiplication-notes/blob/main/Long%20Int%20Multiplication%20with%20Matrices.ipynb) for a longer explanation of how this works.

## Operation handlers
- I made a design decision to make the `add`, `subtract`, `multiply`, `divide`, and `modulo` functions as basic as possible. These functions expect to receive only positive numbers and expect to output only positive numbers. In the case of subtracting `a - b` for example, the `subtract()` function expects `a` and `b` to be positive, and for `a` to be greater than or equal to `b`.
- Because we still need to carry out math that does not meet those requirements, the`handle***` functions transform the more complicated operations into simpler ones. For example:
  - If the client code is `-34 + 68`, the `handleAdd()` function will actually interpret this as `68 - 34` and call `subtract(68, 34)`.
  - Multiplication and division with negatives is handled in the `handleMultiply()` and `handleDivide()` functions. Ex: `-12 * 20` is delegated to `multiply(12, 20)` and the resulting product is converted to a negative number.
  - The `handle***` functions also catch simpler cases where the full operation is not necessary, such as subtracting or dividing a number by itself, or dividing a smaller number by a larger number (which in integer division is simply zero).

